# 1.5: Deploying canisters

## Overview

Now that we have some cycles to pay for our canister's resources, we can deploy our dapp on the mainnet. When a canister is deployed to the mainnet, it's code will be hosted on a node that is providing resources to one of the mainnet's subnets. The canister will be hosted on this node until it is manually uninstalled by the developer, or until it runs out of cycles and is uninstalled automatically. 

Once a dapp is deployed on the mainnet, it can be accessed from the canister's public URL by end-users and can communicate with other canisters that are deployed on the mainnet. 

## Prerequisites

Before you start, verify that you have set up your developer environment according to the instructions in [0.3: Developer environment setup](../level-0/03-dev-env.md).

We will be building off of the previous two modules, [1.3: Developing your first dapp](1.3-first-dapp.md) and [1.4 Acquiring and using cycles](1.4-using-cycles.md). You will need to have followed along and completed the steps outlined in these modules to complete this tutorial. 

## Deploying to the mainnet

To deploy your dapp to the mainnet, first assure that your terminal window is open and you've navigated into the directory of your `poll` dapp that we created in module [1.3: Developing your first dapp](1.3-first-dapp.md).

Then, assure that all necessary packages are installed for our project's frontend with the command:

```sh
npm install
```

Now it's time to register, build, and deploy your dapp. First, let's check to make sure we have an active connection to the mainnet. Run the command:

```sh
dfx ping ic
```

A successful connection to the mainnet will return an output such as:

```
{
  "certified_height": 57374997  "ic_api_version": "0.18.0"  "impl_hash": "d5896681ceac74c83c9473654de75214d5079193294ade3775e89a81270fd0cf"  "impl_version": "f8f59f896499f2fef394d8321116f83351c59aa8"  "replica_health_status": "healthy"  "root_key": [48, 129, 130, 48, 29, 6, 13, 43, 6, 1, 4, 1, 130, 220, 124, 5, 3, 1, 2, 1, 6, 12, 43, 6, 1, 4, 1, 130, 220, 124, 5, 3, 2, 1, 3, 97, 0, 129, 76, 14, 110, 199, 31, 171, 88, 59, 8, 189, 129, 55, 60, 37, 92, 60, 55, 27, 46, 132, 134, 60, 152, 164, 241, 224, 139, 116, 35, 93, 20, 251, 93, 156, 12, 213, 70, 217, 104, 95, 145, 58, 12, 11, 44, 197, 52, 21, 131, 191, 75, 67, 146, 228, 103, 219, 150, 214, 91, 155, 180, 203, 113, 113, 18, 248, 71, 46, 13, 90, 77, 20, 80, 95, 253, 116, 132, 176, 18, 145, 9, 28, 95, 135, 185, 136, 131, 70, 63, 152, 9, 26, 11, 170, 174]
}
```


Now, we can deploy our dapp to the mainnet by running the following command:

```sh
dfx deploy --network ic
```

In this command, the `--network` flag specifies which network the dapp should be deployed on. Other options for this flag are `--network local` and `--network playground`. We covered these in module [1.1: exploring a live demo](1.1-live-demo.md).

Using the flag `--network ic` is required to deploy your dapp on the mainnet. If this flag is not included, your dapp will be only be deployed locally by default. 

This command doesn't include a canister name, meaning it will automatically deploy **all** canisters that are specified in the `dfx.json` file. You can specify a single canister to be deployed by including the canister's name in the command, such as:

```sh
dfx deploy poll_backend --network ic
```

We want to deploy both the `poll_backend` and `poll_frontend` canisters since they work together to create our poll dapp, so the `dfx deploy --network ic` command should be used for this tutorial. 

The output of this command will include information about what actions are happening. For example, the output should resemble the following:

```
Deploying all canisters.
Creating canisters...
Creating canister "poll_backend"...
"poll_backend" canister created on network "ic" with canister id: "5o6tz-saaaa-aaaaa-qaacq-cai"
Creating canister "poll_frontend"...
"poll_frontend" canister created on network "ic" with canister id: "5h5yf-eiaaa-aaaaa-qaada-cai"
Building canisters...
Building frontend...
Installing canisters...
Installing code for canister poll_backend, with canister_id 5o6tz-saaaa-aaaaa-qaacq-cai
Installing code for canister poll_frontend, with canister_id 5h5yf-eiaaa-aaaaa-qaada-cai
Authorizing our identity (default) to the asset canister...
Uploading assets to asset canister...
/index.html 1/1 (472 bytes)
/index.html (gzip) 1/1 (314 bytes)
/index.js 1/1 (260215 bytes)
/index.js (gzip) 1/1 (87776 bytes)
/main.css 1/1 (484 bytes)
/main.css (gzip) 1/1 (263 bytes)
/sample-asset.txt 1/1 (24 bytes)
/logo.png 1/1 (25397 bytes)
/index.js.map 1/1 (842511 bytes)
/index.js.map (gzip) 1/1 (228404 bytes)
/index.js.LICENSE.txt 1/1 (499 bytes)
/index.js.LICENSE.txt (gzip) 1/1 (285 bytes)
Deployed canisters.
```

If you manually converted ICP tokens into cycles, and your cycles wallet doesn't contain enough cycles to complete this deployment, you can add more cycles to your wallet with a command such as:

```sh
dfx ledger top-up 5o6tz-saaaa-aaaaa-qaacq-cai --network ic --amount 1.005
```

This command converts an additional 1.005 ICP tokens to cycles for the `5o6tz-saaaa-aaaaa-qaacq-cai` cycles wallet identifier. The command will return output such as:

```
Transfer sent at BlockHeight: 81520
Canister was topped up!
```

If you used the free cycles coupon, this step is not applicable. 

Now, let's use our dapp! To access the dapp's frontend, first we need to get the canister's URL. To get this, run the command:

```sh
dfx canister id poll_frontend --network ic
```

This command will return the canister's URL, which should look like this:

```
https://5h5yf-eiaaa-aaaaa-qaada-cai.icp0.io
```

If you open this URL in your web browser, you will see the same poll dapp frontend that you saw when you deployed it locally. The only difference is that now your dapp is hosted 100% on-chain, does not rely on your local execution environment to keep running, and you can send this URL to your friends and get them to vote on your poll!

## Next steps

Now that we have canisters running on the mainnet, the next steps are to learn how we can manage these canisters, such as how to upgrade them or delete them. 

- [1.6: Managing canisters](1.6-managing-canisters.md)