# 3.1: Motoko package managers

## Overview

[Mops](https://mops.one) and [Vessel](https://github.com/dfinity/vessel) are package managers for Motoko. Mops utilizes a fully on-chain package registry and ships as part of `dfx`, while Vessel must be downloaded and built separately. In this guide, we'll explore how to download and install Mops and Vessel, then how to import and use different libraries that have been downloaded using a package manager. 

## What is a package manager?

A **package manager** is a collection of tools that automates installing, upgrading, configuring, and removing software packages or libraries. They help efficiently manage the dependencies of a project. In relation to Motoko, Mops and Vessel provide workflows for libraries to be downloaded, upgraded, and imported into Motoko code files. Mops supports over 60 libraries for Motoko, spanning several different functionalities such as utility, encoding, cryptography, data structure libraries, and more. 

Package managers help simplify things such as update management, since they provide an easy way to update all libraries within your project. 

## Installing Mops

To install Mops, first be sure to have set up your developer environment and installed the IC SDK and Node.js, as described in the previous module, [0.3: Developer environment setup](../level-0/03-dev-env.md). Mops is supported in `dfx` version `0.10.0` and higher. 

Then, to install Mops, run the command:

```
npm i -g ic-mops
```

## Installing Vessel

To install Vessel, download the Vessel binary from [the GitHub release page](https://github.com/dfinity/vessel/releases), such as:

```
wget https://github.com/dfinity/vessel/releases/download/v0.6.4/vessel-macos
```

Then, rename `vessel-macos` to `vessel`:

```
mv vessel-macos vessel
```

Change the file's permissions to include execute permissions:

```
chmod +x vessel
```

To initialize Vessel, run `vessel init` in your project's root folder. 

## Using Mops

### Creating a new project

To get started, create a new project in your working directory. Open a terminal window, navigate into your working directory (`developer_journey`), then use the commands:

```
dfx start --clean --background
dfx new mops_example
cd mops_example
```

### Configuring your project to use Mops

Then, open the `dfx.json` file within your project. Add Mops as a `packtool` in the file by adding the following line:

```
{
  "defaults": {
    "build": {
      "packtool": "mops sources"
    }
  }
}
```

### Initializing Mops

Then, initialize the Mops configuration with the command:

```
mops init
```

You'll be prompted to choose whether you plan to use Mops to pull packages or publish packages:

```
? Select type: › - Use arrow-keys. Return to submit.
❯   Project (I just want to use mops packages in my project)
    Package (I plan to publish this package on mops)
```

In this case, select 'Project'. For more information about publishing packages, see the [publishing a package](#publishing-a-package) section. 

You will also be prompted to choose if you'd like to use a GitHub workflow. This is optional. 

### Adding packages to `mops.toml`. 

To install a package with Mops, you need to specify the package in the `mops.toml` file within your project. To add a package to this file, you can use the command `maps add` then the package name:

```
mops add base
```

Or, you can add packages directly from GitHub by specifying the repository's URL:

```
mops add https://github.com/dfinity/motoko-base
```

You can also specify the branch, commit hash, or tag by adding `#<branch/tag/hash>`:

```
mops add https://github.com/dfinity/motoko-base#moc-0.9.1
```

If you have a locally stored package, you can put the source files inside your project's directory, then add them by specifying the path:

```
mops add ./local-package
```

Using any of these workflows will add the package to the `mops.toml` file.

Then, to install all packages specified in this file, use the command:

```
mops install
```

### Publishing a package

If you develop a package that you'd like to publish so other developers can use it, you can publish it to the Mops registry! For instructions on publishing a package to Mops, check out the instructions [here](https://github.com/ZenVoich/mops#publish-a-package).

## Using Vessel

To pull a package using Vessel, edit the `vessel.dhall` file to include what packages your project will import. 

Then, edit your `dfx.json` file to use the `packtool` of `vessel sources`:

```
"defaults": {
  "build": {
    "packtool": "vessel sources"
  }
}
```


## Importing packages into your Motoko code

Once a package has been installed, whether it was installed using Mops or Vessel, you can import them into your Motoko code file using the line `import PackageName "mo:<package_name>";`.

We've used this command in previous Motoko code examples to import packages such as the Motoko `base` library. For example, recall the `characterCount` actor code from the previous module [2.6: Motoko level 2](../level-2/2.6-motoko-lvl2.md):

```motoko
import Text "mo:base/Text";

actor characterCount {

    public func test(text: Text) : async Bool {
        let size = Text.size(text);
        return size % 2 == 0;
    };
};
```


